% brainstorm:

% * citar fundamento em teorias de contornos e pouco uso em composição
% * exemplos das necessidades de operações na composição (peça do mestrado)
% * desenvolvimento do goiaba (para que serve, exemplo de código e de
% saída)
% * trabalhos futuros

\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:introduction}

Contours can be understood as the shape or format of an object. In
Music, they can be associated to elements like pitch, density, rhythm,
and represent a parameter in function of another, as pitch in function
of time. Contours can be easily recognized from graphic representation
by professionals and laymen alike \cite{marvin88:generalized}. For
instance, Beethoven's Fifth Symphony main motive and its pitch contour
are represented respectively in figures \ref{fig:5a-sinfonia-motivo}
and \ref{fig:c-3120}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \subfloat[Main motive]{
    \includegraphics[scale=.9]{5a-sinfonia}
    \label{fig:5a-sinfonia-motivo}
  }

  \subfloat[Contour F(3 1 2 0)]{
    \includegraphics{c-3120}
    \label{fig:c-3120}
  }
  \caption{Fifth Symphony main motive contour}
  \label{fig:5a-sinfonia}
\end{figure}

Technically, a contour is an ordered set of numbered elements
\cite{morris93:directions}. Absolute values of contour elements are
ignored, and only the high-low relationship between them is regarded.
For instance, the music in figures \ref{fig:5a-sinfonia-motivo} and
\ref{fig:ly-3120} have the same pitch contour, graphically represented
in figure \ref{fig:c-3120}, and symbolically by F(3 1 2
0)\footnote{The uppercase letter F names the contour.}. Yet, both
passages sound completely different. In our opinion that is a feature
in using contour theory in composition, to have an underlining process
providing coherence and musical variety at the same time.

The study of contour is important because, like motives and pitch
sets, contours can help to give coherence to a musical piece. They
represent structural devices that can be combined through operations
like inversion and retrogradation, and can be approached by analytical
or compositional points of view.

\begin{figure}[h!]
  \centering
  \includegraphics{ly-3120-qualquer}
  \caption{A melody with the F(3 1 2 0) contour}
  \label{fig:ly-3120}
\end{figure}

Contour theories
\cite{friedmann85:methodology,friedmann87:response,morris87:composition,morris93:directions,marvin.ea87:relating,marvin88:generalized,polansky.ea92:possible,quinn97:fuzzy,clifford95:contour,beard03:contour}
have been developed to organize in a systematic way the knowledge
about contour. These theories were developed primarily as analytic
techniques for non-tonal compositions \cite{beard03:contour}, and
provide arrays, matrices and many operations to help the comparison of
contours, like inversion, translation, comparison matrix, and contour
interval array. It's out of the scope of this paper to provide a
comprehensive review about contour theory. The reader can find a good
literature review in \cite{beard03:contour}.

A computer program to process contours can assist composers and
analysts in tasks like the calculation of operations---avoiding human
error and wasting time---, automated graphical plotting, and
conversion from music score to contours and vice-versa. For these
reasons we are developing \goiaba{}\footnote{Goiaba is the Portuguese
  for guava.}, a contour processing software (described in section
\ref{sec:goiaba}).

\section{The contour processing program Goiaba}
\label{sec:goiaba}

\goiaba{} is a program written in Common Lisp
\cite{graham94:lisp,team07:sbcl} to process and plot contours
developed by the authors of this paper. It has many contour-related
operations, like inversion, retrogradation, rotation, contour
reduction \cite{adams76:melodic}, contour class, contour adjacency
series, contour adjacency series vector, contour interval, contour
interval array, contour class vector I and II
\cite{friedmann85:methodology}, and comparison matrix
\cite{morris93:directions}. Currently, \goiaba{} accepts and shows
contours in a numeric format, but it can also plot contours in a pdf
file.

\goiaba{} has two representations for contours; simple contours
represents only the values of the contour elements, and contour with
durations is basically a collection of cartesian points. \note{I'm not
  happy with the following sentence} For instance, the contour in
figure \ref{fig:c-3120} would be represented as a simple contour in
\goiaba{} as \code{\#s(3 1 2 0)} and as a contour with duration as
\code{\#d(\#p(0 3) \#p(1 1) \#p(2 2) \#p(3 0))}. The notation
\code{\#s(\ldots)} and \code{\#d(\ldots)} indicate a simple contour
and a contour with duration, respectively. The notation \code{\#p(x
  y)} indicates a point with two values. So, from the example we can
see that \goiaba{} really represents a contour with duration as a
collection of points. The symbols \#s, \#d, and \#p are user-defined
lisp reader macros that expand into code to instantiate objects of
types simple-contour, contour-with-duration, and point, respectively.
For instance, \code{\#p(0 1)} is expanded to \code{(make-instance
  'point :x 0 :y 1)}, which is the usual way of instantiating objects
in common lisp. Finally, \goiaba{} has a few constructor functions
besides the reader macros to help the creation of contour objects. The
functions, \texttt{make-point-list},
\texttt{make-sim\-ple-contour\-list}, and
\texttt{make-contour-with-dura\-tion-list}, map a list to the
correspondent object.

\goiaba{} uses the Cl-pdf library\footnote{\url{www.cliki.net/CL-PDF}}
to plot contours, allowing easy visualization of contour operations.
For instance, the following code generates a figure with the original
contour Z, \code{\#s(0 5 3 4 1 3)}, and its retrogradation, inversion,
and rotation. The result can be seen in figure \ref{fig:operacoes}.

\begin{verbatim}
(plot "contour.pdf"
      Z "original Z" :red
      (retrograde Z) "retrograde" :blue
      (inversion Z) "inversion" :orange
      (rotation Z 1) "rotation" :green)
\end{verbatim}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[scale=.44]{contornos}
  \caption{\goiaba{} output: Z(0 5 3 4 1 3) contour operations}
  \label{fig:operacoes}
\end{figure}

\goiaba{} takes advantages of Common Lisp's multimethods capabilities.
In Common Lisp a method is actually a generic function that
specializes on the type of its arguments. For example, we have two
definitions for a generic function called \texttt{rotate}, one
specializes on the contour-with-duration object while the other on the
simple-contour object. The advantage of this approach is that we can
add more types of contour if necessary and write the appropriate
generic functions that will specialize on those types, without
disrupting the existing code.

\begin{figure*}
\begin{verbatim}
(defmethod rotate ((object contour-with-duration) &optional (factor 1))
  (if (> fator (length (points object)))
      (let ((x (mapcar #'point-x (points object)))
            (y (mapcar #'point-y (points object))))
        (make-contour-with-duration (mapcar #'make-point x
           (append (subseq y factor) (subseq y 0 factor)))))))

(defmethod rotate ((object simple-contour) &optional (factor 1))
  (make-simple-contour (append (subseq (points object) factor)
                               (subseq (points object) 0 factor))))
\end{verbatim}
  \caption{Multi-methods}
  \label{fig:code-methods}
\end{figure*}

\section{The application of Contour in composition}
\label{sec:cont-appl-comp}

Systematic studies about the usage of contour operations and
combinations in musical composition are scarce, despite the possible
coherence that contours can provide. For this reason we are
researching the usage of contour in composition and its advantages.
The first author of this paper, in his master's \cite{sampaio08:em},
composed a woodwind quintet, \textit{Em Torno da Romã}\footnote{Around
  the Pomegranate, The Shape of the Pomegranate} based on contour
theories operations. \note{checar e escolher tradução}

\textit{Em torno da Romã} was composed entirely using \goiaba{} to
simplify the calculation of contour operations and plotting. The piece
is based on the contour P(5 3 4 1 2 0) and on combinations of contour
operations associated to parameters such as pitch, tempo, density and
texture. In figure \ref{fig:c-534120} we can see the original contour
P and its subsets and operations; retrogradation, inversion, rotation,
and interpolation.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics{c-534120}
  \caption{P(5 3 4 1 2 0) contour}
  \label{fig:c-534120}
\end{figure}

\goiaba{} was essential to compose a \eng{fugato} session in the
quintet because each part of the subject and countersubject were based
on different combinations of operations of rotation and
retrogradation. The subject is formed by the concatenation of P and
its rotation by a factor of 3, as seen in figure
\ref{fig:sujeito-fugato}. Figure \ref{fig:output-sujeito-fugato} shows
\goiaba{}'s graphical output for both contours. The countersubject is
formed by a sequence of three rotations (by the factor of 5, 4, and 3)
of the retrograde of P (fig. \ref{fig:contra-sujeito-fugato}). We can
see the graphical output of these contours in figure
\ref{fig:output-contra-sujeito-fugato}.

\begin{figure*}
  \centering
  \subfloat[Subject]{
    \includegraphics[scale=2.8]{sujeito-fugato}
    \label{fig:sujeito-fugato}
  }

  \subfloat[Counter-subject]{
    \includegraphics[scale=2.8]{contra-sujeito-fugato}
    \label{fig:contra-sujeito-fugato}
  }
  \caption{Structural elements of \eng{fugato}}
  \label{fig:elementos-fugato}
\end{figure*}

\begin{figure*}
  \centering
  \subfloat[Subject]{
    \includegraphics[scale=.44]{output-subject}
    \label{fig:output-sujeito-fugato}
  }
  \subfloat[Counter-subject]{
    \includegraphics[scale=.44]{output-countersubject}
    \label{fig:output-contra-sujeito-fugato}
  }
  \caption{Software output for \eng{fugato} contour operations}
  \label{fig:output-fugato}
\end{figure*}

\section{Conclusion and future work}
\label{sec:conclusion-future-work}

Contours help to give coherence to musical piece, are easily
recognized through graphics by musicians and laymen, and can be used
to analyze and compose music. Contour theories provide many operations
that demand precise mathematical calculations and graphical
representations easy plotting. For this reason we are developing
\goiaba{}, a software that receives as input contour symbolic
representations, and outputs contour symbolic and graphic
representations.

In the future \goiaba{} will receive as input scores in the
Lilypond\footnote{\url{http://lilypond.org/}} format. Lilypond has
conversors from formats as MIDI,
ABC\footnote{\url{http://abcnotation.org.uk/}},
MusicXML\footnote{\url{http://www.musicxml.org/}}, and ETF
Finale\footnote{\url{http://www.music-notation.info/en/formats/ETF.html}}
to its one. As well \goiaba{} will have a graphical interface. The
next step in our research is to improve \goiaba{} user interaction,
releasing a more friendly interface.

%%% Local Variables: 
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "goiaba-contour-processor"
%%% End: 